You were born in Rockdale? I was here at the mine,
the broken mine. You were born at the old mine?
Yeah, I was born there. I was raised and born there.
I lived in Bonne Conde all my life. How old were you
when you went into the mines? What? How old were you
when you went into the mines? I was about 18 when I
worked in there. I worked in there about six months
here. I wasn't old enough, you know. I worked about
six months. I went down there with Daddy, you know.
Your dad? I went down to Lexington. Yeah, Daddy,
yeah.
Where did your dad come from? He came from Germany.
What part of Germany? I don't remember. Did your
mother come from Germany also? Yeah, she came too
with his kids, yeah.
Okay. So you only worked in the mines about six
months? Yeah, I did. Yeah, Daddy, he worked long,
you know. Yeah, he did. Well, did you actually go
in, down inside the mine? Yeah, I went down in
there. Yeah, I went down in there. What kind of
tools did you use? Pick and shovel. Pick and
shovel? Yeah, pick and shovel. Carbide lamps, you
know. Yeah. Hang up here. Right, yeah. How many
hours a day would you work on average? Ah, they
wouldn't work more than me. Eight. Eight to five.
That's about ten hours. Nine hours. Nine hours,
yeah. Would you eat down inside the mine? Yeah,
we'd eat down there. The Mexicans, they'd take
their lunch along down there. They wouldn't come
out until evening, you know, about four or five. I
see. You lived at the mine site? Yeah, I lived out
there. I was born out there. Could you describe the
house in which you lived? The what? The house where
you lived out there at the mines? What did it look
like? Oh, it was an old house, kind of like this
here, but you know. Was it painted or? No, it wasn't
painted. No, it wasn't painted. Well, how many
rooms were in the house?
Lewis, you know how many rooms was in our house? How
many rooms in our house? How many rooms in our
house? Yeah. It's a big family. It was 12 kids in the
family. What?
Seven with the bag. Oh, she's talking about this
house? What?
Seven with the bag. Seven with the bag, at least she
said. Out there at the mine. At the mine, yeah. And
then they had two porches on it, you know,
honestly. Old-time, you know how they used to have
houses. It's kind of like these steps in the
old-time house, too. You got two by sixes there.
That's the old number. 42NC, that's later on, they
made a letter. Right. See that? That's the old
house, old number yet. Later on, they made that
letter. Right. You know, played it. Uh-huh. Well,
with this house out there, what years were you
living out at Global Mine? Since I was born, I was
born in 1900. 1900. We moved out here in 1919. How
many years? So it's 19 years you lived at the mine
site itself. I said we moved out here in 1919. I was
born out here in 1900, December 21st. Did your
father work in the mine all his life? No, he didn't.
And then Grandpa, he opened up that lignite mine
out there, so Daddy went to work for him. Grandpa?
Grandpa Vogel, yeah. Grandpa Vogel. Yeah, he
opened that lignite mine out here with coffee.
clubhouse, I don't know if he went. He's about two
miles from here. That's the first link that I might
fix, they said, you know, on this side of the road,
north side of the road. Right. Yeah, it's about two
miles out here. Yeah, so daddy went to work for him,
you know. Right. Went to work for him, him and
grandpa's, you know, daughter, yeah, so they got
married, you know. I see. Yeah, yeah. So your
father married Grandpa Vogel's daughter?
Daughter, yeah. I see. Yeah, that's Vogel's
grandmother. My daddy's name is Lawrence, you
know. Right. Vogel, yeah. They married,
yeah. Well, what did your dad do at the mine? Was he a
superintendent or a foreman? Yeah, he was kind of a
foreman, yeah.
Did you go to school out at the mines? School,
school. Yeah, we were taught at which school?
Excuse me, there at the Mines, or did you come in
Rockdale? No, Talbert Ridge School. That is over
here. I did the country. About two months you had to
work. What was the name of that school? Talbert
Ridge. Talbert? Talbert Ridge. T-A-L-B-E-R-T?
Yeah, Talbert Ridge. Talbert Ridge. Did you go to
school three, four months out of the year, or how
long did you go to school? I was a full term.
For the term, let me see, I guess from September,
September till, I guess I could have got to school
now almost about that long, I believe. Oh, you did?
Did you like going to school out there? Yeah. Did
you? Willie told me yesterday that he played hooky
somewhere. Yeah, he never got there. He wouldn't
go anywhere. He stayed in the woods, you know. But
you liked to go to school? Yeah, I went to school. I
went to seventh grade, I think, when I taught out
in the country. Well, they had me play hooky, you
know, and Daddy would take the bell out in the
morning and finish school with us, you know, and
lay it out in the woods till it even didn't come back
home, you know. Well, he said he was sorry now he did
that, you know, because he can't do it and write
much. Yeah. I'm sure he learned a lot out there in
the woods. I don't know, maybe. Well, did you get
along with the Mexican families out there? Yeah,
we done all right.
Well, you lived in a big house then, comparatively
speaking, to their houses. Can you remember how
their houses lived? The other house, they had one
room, one kitchen. One room, one kitchen? Yeah,
just for the, you know, for the... Grandma owned
them houses, you know, and she rented out to the
Mexicans, you know. I see. Mine belonged to
Grandpa. Grandma and them had them. I made about 30
houses, I believe. The Mexicans, they paid rent
every two weeks, you know. They weren't there but
two weeks? They paid rent every two weeks. I see.
They paid the Mexicans every two weeks. I see. Did
you go into Rockdale very often or did you stay out
of the mine camp most of the time? I stayed out there
most of the time.
So in 1919, what happened? Did you leave the mines
then? No. And you came here? Yes. And you became a
farmer? Yes, I was a farmer. Had you saved up some
money to buy some land? No. Were you a
sharecropper, or did you come with your father? I
came with his dad, yeah. I see. So he was able to save
up some money from working at the mines to buy his
own land? Yeah, he got it all. We owed some of it. We
got to pay it all, you know.
Can you remember anything about the commissary
out there at the mine? Yeah, kind of something,
yeah. Do you remember what it looked like? It was
just one room building, you know, just one room.
Just made box lumber, you know, just plain
building, you know. What kind of goods were sold at
the commissary? Ah, they sold more just grocery
stuff, I believe. No clothes or anything? No, I
don't blame
you. You were down there only six months, but you
must remember some of the hazards of mining. Were
there any dangers down there in the mines? Not too
much. Down there, you know, some dirt would fall
down. Tunnels, you know, tunnels about that wide,
you know. So down there, some would cave down, you
know, and they'd put props under there, you know,
to keep from, you know, falling on the workers,
yeah. How was the air down there? The air? Was the
air bad to breathe, or...? It was pretty good. They
had a fan, you know, what you call an air shaft, you
know, on the other end of the fan, you know. Put the
fresh air in and suck it out, you know. Sometimes
it'd get bad. Sometimes it would. Had to, you know,
fix it, though, you know. They make the air shafts
or the air go, you know, circulating. Had a fan run
by steam, you know, steam boiler, yeah. How did the
Mexican workers work? Did they sing while they
were working? Did they work together? Or did they
work by themselves? Oh, each one worked
separately. See, they got paid by those little
cars, you know. They'd fill, you know, so and so
much, you know. I don't remember how much they got.
About 1,500 pounds in there. Little cars that run
on little wheels, you know. Yeah. Little trucks
put mules that pull to the shaft, you know. Right.
They did work by them. The more they'd fill, you
know, the more they'd make, you know. You see? And
those other ones, they worked by the day. The other
ones? The other ones, you know. Not one, but one to
hose the coal up and down, you know. Right. Dump it
out in the railroad car, you know. I see. Yeah. Then
they had to have a man down in there, shove them cars
on the cage, you know. So they pull it up and dump it
down and let it back down. And those people, the men
who ran the machinery were paid by the day? They
were by the day. And the Mexicans and the other
people who were down in the mines? Yeah, they
worked by the car load, you know. I see. The more
they fill, the more they make, you know. Were you a
good miner when you were working down here? Did you
mine a lot of coal every day? I didn't do much. I done
pretty good, I guess, for it. my age, you know. I
wasn't used to it much. How come you went down in the
mines? What? How come you went down in the mines to
work? Because I lived out there. You couldn't get a
job working the machinery? I don't believe it. I
wasn't old enough. I wasn't 18. I wasn't 18 yet.
See, that here former, he wasn't allowed to work
nobody unless he was 18 in the mines. I see. But that
daddy fool, when he had to sign paper in case I got
hurt or something, he couldn't complain, you
know. Right. Well, do you remember Jose Morales?
What? Do you remember Jose Morales? I don't
believe I remember that Mexican. Well, he was 15
years old in that big cave-in in 1913. The what? The
cave-in. Yeah, cave-in, yeah. And he was 15 years
old. Yeah. That was a little young then for— Yeah,
it was young, but they had to— Oh, they couldn't
work unless they was 18, you know. They had to sign
in case they get hurt, you know. The boys get hurt,
they couldn't, you know, pursue them or
something, you know, complain, you know. I see.
They took that chance, yeah. So Grandpa Vogel
would make them sign these release forms. I see. Do
you remember what the youngest Mexican worker you
saw down there was? Adam B. was in it, and he owned
it, that Adam B. And then Jose was in the Adam B. How
did they use the mules? Did they take them down in
the morning and bring them back? Yeah, bring them
up back in the evening, yeah. Take them down and
bring them back in the evening. Were they big
mules, little mules? About medium size. About
medium size, okay.
Were they easy animals to work with? What? Were
they easy animals? Yeah, they were easy tame
mules. But they had many of them. They knew what to
do, you know, what they had to do. Would you hitch
the mule up to the small coal car? Yeah, car, and
they'd pull it, you know. To the shaft? To the
shaft, yeah. On the north side, they didn't have to
hitch them in that way, going downhill and cool
ones this way and that way, you know. To the east it
goes downhill and south it goes down. This way goes
up, you know. They had to pull the cars up here with
the mules. It's just ridiculous, you know, coming
down the road and down the side pushing. Was
anybody hurt when you were down working in the
mine? No, not that I know
of. Did you pretty much stay to your own house or did
you have Mexican friends when you were little? You
know, did you socialize with them? Yeah, we got
along with them, yeah. We didn't run around with
some, you know, but there's some camp there, you
know. How far away was the camp, the Mexican camp,
from your house? Oh, it was close. It went too far.
Some houses, some houses were, you know, some were
close. What, about 50 yards or something like
that? Yeah. Did, what kind of entertainment did
the Mexicans have? Do you remember that? Did they
sing or... If they had weddings, they'd dance, you
know. They'd sing something. They would play
guitar,
you know. Let me ask you this. What, you know,
mining must be really hard work. What? Mining must
be really hard work. Yeah, it's hard work, yeah. So
what did you eat, you know, in the morning before
you went to the mine, and then at dinner, and then at
supper? What kind of food did you eat? Ah, we just
had like cream of wheat or something like that, you
know. And for breakfast? Yeah. And what about for
dinner? Ah, chicken or something else, like that
meat, you know. Would you come up out of the mine to
eat, or did you eat your dinner down in the mine? I
came on home, then I went back. I see. And then for
supper, what did you have? You wasn't in the mine
much. You was just with Daddy. I told him I wasn't in
that much. He was too young yet. I worked in a little
while. I worked in a little while. They're not
allowed to take their children or their sons down
there to work unless, you know, they give
permission. They have to be 18. They have to be 18
before they can work in there, the boys. Unless
their parents want to, you know. Right. Because if
they might get hurt, they could sue them. This way
they couldn't do that. By the way, are you Willie's
wife? No, just a sister. I'm the second oldest.
There's two girls. I've got a sister who lives
uptown. She's a year older than I am. We're the two
oldest. Then comes Willie. Are you Louise?
Uh-huh. Louise Lawrence? Do y'all remember
Gustav Vogel? Yes, she's our cousin. Your cousin.
Gustav Miller. Why, you know her? No, I don't. I
just, I heard about her. I was talking to Miss Beth
the other day. Yes, she's my cousin. She's Gus
Vogel's daughter. Is she still alive by any
chance? Oh, no, she died 30 years ago or something
like that. No, I may be. I understand she ran a
little school for the Mexican children there.
Yes. Do you remember anything? I don't know
anything about the school business. I just know
that Billy was out there at the mining camps too,
and she'd come out there. She lived in town. Right.
And she'd come out there and she'd teach them, but I
don't know anything else about it. I guess they
learned their English from Augusta. Uh-huh. You
lived out at the mines with women. Do you remember?
The whole family of us lived out there. My mother
and dad and 14 children. 12 children, I think.
There's 14 of us in all of them. My goodness. Do you
remember any interesting stories, humor stories
out there? You know, growing up or when you were
older? Oh, well, we just played ball a whole lot. We
went crawfishing in the caves, and friends would
come out there, and we'd play marbles, and
anything a boy would play, we'd play, too. Were
most of your friends... We were mostly boys. Were
most of your friends... We were nine girls, nine
girls and three boys in our family. How did you put
up with that, Willie?
Were most of your friends in Rockdale? Oh, yeah, we
know everybody in Rockdale. Did you have any
friends out at the mine? Well, they wasn't just
grown folks. They had very few children. Willie
Helfer was one of them. Yeah, I talked to Willie
yesterday. Yeah, he was my oldest sister's age, I
believe. or a year older, and he and Willie chummed
a lot. He'd come to our house, he and his folks.
There wasn't very many white folks living out
there, mostly, and Mexicans. Right. And we didn't
have nothing to do with it. Oh, you didn't? Chum
rockin' things out of maybe. Willie was telling me
he learned Mexican, you know, the Spanish
language really. Yeah. Daddy did too, and mother,
and I can speak pretty good. I can tell you the name
of any kind of vegetable. We sold them vegetables.
We had a little express wagon, you know. Did you
have a garden out by your house there? Yeah, we had a
big garden and lots of pretty flowers. Daddy was a
flower lover. He had lots of pretty flowers. We
kids had to do the watering, you know. Well, did the
Mexicans have their own gardens, too? Some, but
they grown mostly... Hot peppers. Hot peppers
and... Squash. Squash, something like that.
Squash and what do you call them, cassaws? That's
what they grown mostly. But you didn't have very
much contact with the Mexicans? No, no. As far as
speaking with them, you know, like you and I
together, we couldn't do that. Oh, really? But we
learned, you know, like good morning, good
evening, and any kind of vegetable. Any kind of
vegetable. Did many of them learn? We had cattle.
We had cows, and we sold them milk and butter.
And they paid you cash for it? Uh-huh. Did you trade
at the commissary store? Yeah, there was a little
one right in our house, our grandmother's house.
And we did trading there. And they also had, in
those days, The meat market in town here, he had a
wagon team, and he'd come out there selling meat,
go around the camp, sell meat. The ice man would
come out and sell ice. The silver water man would
come out there and sell soda water. The ice cream
man would come out there. The lady sold bonnets and
clothing. She'd come out there, take orders. You
know, anybody that had something to sell had to
come out there. Even the man at Christmas time
would come with a whole load of Christmas trees.
Oh, wow. And the Mexicans would buy Christmas
trees? Yeah, yeah. Some of them had horses and
buggies of their own, and some didn't. We all
walked the town a lot, you know. I said it was three
miles. I don't know how far it was. It really was.
I'd say it was three miles. And we'd walk along the
railroad or along the dirt road. It wasn't but a
dirt road. It wasn't down then. But after 1919,
y'all didn't do any more mining? No, we moved out
here then, 1919. Do you prefer farming to mining?
Yes. Why is that? Well, the doctor told Daddy he had
to get out of that hole. He wouldn't live there
long. Why was that?
Did he pick up a disease or something? No, you know,
but... He'd always get headaches, so I guess that A
in there. The gas, you know, mines have gas in them.
Yeah, the headache, you know. So your Daddy went
down in the mine? Uh-huh. He was a... kind of boss of
the Mexicans. Grandfather made him boss. Did he
have any trouble with Mexicans? No. That's where
he learned to speak Spanish, you know. I see.
We're German. Right. And we could speak, us older
kids all learned how to speak German. And then we
learned how to speak some Spanish and English. We
could speak three languages. Grandmother used
to, in the First World War I was on, She took German
newspapers. And her children all got married and
left home and left her there by herself. So mother
said, from now on, you and Martha are going to have
to go one night you go, stay with them, and the other
night Louise go and stay with them. So we did that.
Every night she'd read the news to us in German, you
know, tell us what it's about. About the war. And I
got so I really could live, too. The newspaper
writing, you know, print is more like in German.
But letter writing has got too many hooks and
crooks I see. I never did learn how to write it or
read it either. Only thing I can read is Dear
Friend, Dear Friend, Leave a Friend. That's all I
can read. Well, when you left the mines, did you
pretty much forget about the mines? Or did you keep
in contact? Yeah, we kind of forgot after a while.
Well, mostly all the mines closed up then, didn't
they? Yeah.
Yeah, they closed up in the Depression, pretty
much. They closed up during the 1930s. They got oil
afterwards and they couldn't sell any more coal,
you know. They got oil cheaper, you know, cleaner.
Couldn't sell any more coal. Couldn't make no
money. What do you think about shale oil coming in
now and running again? You know, shale oil coming
in again. Yeah, I guess all right now. coal would be
worse, you know, and the oil is so high now. Them,
they could get oil cheap, you know. Get oil
cheaper. Did you use coal in your stove in your
house? We used it in the heater. We used lignite
coal in the heater. But you didn't use it to cook
with? No, not the cook stove. Had lots of timber
there. They made their own ties, what you call it,
little ties to put the railroad on. And they made
their own. They had a little saw mill, too, there,
right at the boiler house. And they used steam out
of the boiler, you know. Right, right. And made
their own ties. And then what they cut off, you
know, they'd cut into blocks for us for stove wood,
for grandmother and us. And they'd haul it up to the
house. And we kids would chop it in sizes for the
stove. That sounds good. Do you remember anything
about, I know you worked at the Vogel Mines, you
know, for the first 19 years, or you lived there. Do
you remember anything about the Texas Coal
Company? Texas Coal Company, where was that at?
Down here, just south of 79, it's about a mile down.
Yeah, I know. They were all around there. Yeah,
down in that bay. But which one was the Texas Coal
Company? But I don't remember. It was... where the
Rogel mine was up on the hill, the Stribble mine.
The Texas might have been on the other side,
further down, you know, further east. Seemed like
it was. Further east, yeah, down in there.
There's the Rogel, Texas mine. In the north of the
coal mine, it is up this way, across the railroad.
The Whirly mine, the Big Lump mine. Big Lump was
down at what side of the creek, which was the land,
you know, on the north side of the railroad. Close
to the That's close to where Texas Coal is south of
Sandy Creek. Yeah, what is? The Texas Coal Company
was south of Sandy Creek. Yeah, that might have
been, yeah, that might have been in Texas down in
there. The one of mine, Dr. Dunkey had a mine. There
was some more of mine, but I don't remember there. I
was too young, you know, for the early, maybe, I
don't know. I did remember all the names, but I
can't think of them all right now. I'm getting old
too. I'm forgetting. Well, that's what we're
trying to do here is get all that information down.
I said whenever we all be gone, the younger folks
won't know a thing about it. When you tell them now
about it, they look at you like you're telling them
a fib or something. I don't know. They're too much
in a hurry nowadays, I guess. Too much in a hurry. So
you don't miss the coal mining. You'd much rather
be a farmer.
Well, we couldn't get in that age. We ain't going to
be much of anything, I presume. Y'all look pretty
spry to me. What happened to your old house there at
the Vogel Mine? After a while, they tore it down.
When grandmother died, They tore it down and built
another room onto her house. That's Grandmother
Vogel. Uh-huh. And we moved in there. We lived in
there until we moved over here. Then Gus Vogel
moved out there. Uncle Gus, he moved in that house
after he died afterwards. He moved out here, Henry
Brown, you know. His daughter married Henry
Brown, B-R-A-H-M, Brown. Right. He lives west of
town, right? No, right here. Right out here. Right
over there, Underpass. Underpass, you know.
Across the railroad. But he passed away last year.
If you go to that one boy, he could take you out
there. He owned all that old land, most of it. He
could take you down to the mines, show you some of
them. But Underpass here. Right. It's right on the
right, on the south side of the Raywood. You can see
the house. It's a trailer house sitting there. It
is close to the Raywood, Ron Henry Brown. He's not
there all the way. He works on the Raywood most of
the time. John Henry. John Henry. He's the only one
left of that family in. John Henry? Yeah. You say he
might be there today? He had bad luck last year.
Henry Bromiself died, his son died, and then his
wife ran into a bus here, and she got killed. And all
that's left is John Henry? John Henry and her, his
brother's wife's children. I believe there's two
of them, two boys. So Robert doesn't live there
anymore? Robert and I. Okay.
Yeah, well, that one boy used to go out to sea. I
don't know. He's not there always. He works on the
railroad, you know, at Taylor. Then he comes in.
Sometimes he has to stay at night, you know. See,
John Henry's mother was our cousin, too. That was
Augusta Vogel's sister. I see. John Henry, that
was Augusta Vogel. That was her mama. That was his
mama. Minner, Minner, yeah, not Gustav Minner.
Minner Roper, that was, Minner and Gustav were
sisters, you know. That's M-I-N-A. Uh-huh. Yeah,
Minner, yeah, that was, Minner, that was his mom,
Minner Roper.
He seemed like, he was a real pet. Yeah, Henry
Brown, he owned most of that land out there, and he
might take you on to the old, Richard's mine,
that's just right from his house, that direction,
you know, not too far.
One thing I want to ask, how did y'all get medical
service out there tonight? Oh, they had a company
doctor, you know, in Rockdale. A company doctor,
he'd come out there every two weeks, each Mexican,
he had a family, he had to pay 50 cents every payday,
you know. And Daddy didn't pay too, you know, every
two weeks paid that doctor 50 cents. And if
somebody gets sick and he had to come on out, it
would cost him any more, you know. It wouldn't cost
him? No, any more, no. Anyway, where's the
medicine? At the drugstore. It was made out there.
They paid so much a month, and they got the medicine
for so much. Where did they get their medicine? At
the commissary? No, at Tom's. At the drugstore.